---
layout: post
title:      " Civic tech, citizenship, and where developers fit into it all"
date:       2018-02-12 01:36:59 +0000
permalink:  civic_tech_citizenship_and_where_developers_fit_into_it_all
---


On Friday I attended an [event](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the-innovation-agenda-how-city-governments-and-industry-collide-in-civic-tech-tickets-42132231639#) at Fordham Law School billed as "The Innovation Agenda: How City Governments and Industry Collide in Civic Tech." While parts of the discussion focused on how application design affects what users get out of civic tech efforts, it also focused on the larger picture in terms of how technological initiatives contribute to republican democracy. Professor Jessie Baldwin-Philippi touched on ideas from her book, [Using Technology, Building Democracy: Digital Campaigning and the Construction of Citizenship](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0190231920), which focused on political campaigns' digital messaging and its implications for citizenship.

Baldwin-Philippi also went into detail about cities' use of digital applications for their 311 systems, drawing from her experiences in Boston when their system was being developed and rolled out. I had previously attended a Beta.NYC [event](http://www.samcode.org/tech_and_the_city_ed_note_sorry) that highlighted New York City's 311 data that focused on how it could be used by community board members, so it was interesting to contrast Boston's system with the current incarnation of New York's. Boston initially aspired to a portal that would go beyond mere problem reporting to fostering connections between the city and its citizens, though it ultimately became more 311-like (and the system was renamed accordingly).

It was interesting to hear about the city's efforts to expand access and usage of the application beyond the usual predominant demographics (i.e., those that skew more affluent, whiter, maler, and younger than the general population) for apps through engagement with community organizations, with some notable successes. Limitations to this approach were discussed, given that the organizations involved generally had a preexisting relationship to the city government. A member of the audience noted that surveys of city citizens to see which organizations they relied on was a methodology used elsewhere and could be a way to expand the city's outreach efforts. Also interesting was the discussion about what parts of the app people used (and did not tend to use) and how they felt after using the app versus communicating with people through the traditional 311 phone line (in general, people felt better after speaking to a live human).

Another topic of discussion were incubation initiatives and contests from cities to spur civic innovation, such as the LinkNYC kiosks that have taken up the real estate formerly occupied by pay telephones in New York City. As with another initiative, CitiBikes, the kiosks have the blessing of the city but are privately run and ad supported; at the start, they favored heavily trafficked (and more affluent areas), and have been slower to spread to the rest of the city. The profit motive readily diverges from the desire for equitable services throughout a city, so the tension between the two is a constant consideration that city governments must balance.

The Beta.NYC event had also touched on other areas of open data available from New York besides 311 programs. The advent and expansion of open data in cities received attention at this event as well, including discussion of privacy and monetization by private companies (and, for that matter, whether the monetization cities might be giving up by releasing the data for free should factor into decisions of what to release). The amount of access citizens have to their personal data is also a key consideration.

From a developer's perspective, much of the above might seem beyond one's purview. However, development can contribute strongly to the efficacy of civic tech to solve problems and increase citizen participation. On the front end, design that maximizes productive usage of civic tech apps and that lends itself to adoption among all demographics, including those less accustomed to relying on an app. On the backend, sound data organization and efficient programming can help citizens quickly find the information they are looking for and ensure that an app works quickly and responsively even on older devices. Knowing the overall theory behind and aspirations for a given application helps provide guiding principles at each step of development. These are all, of course, good development principles in general!
